How to prepare data for the model?
Introduction
Preparing data for a machine learning model is a crucial process. By having unprepared data and training the model with it, we greatly increase the risk that the model may produce incorrect or inaccurate results. Poor model performance can ultimately make business decisions based on faulty predictions and cause losses for the company.

There are a number of important principles to follow when preparing data for a model. Some of them have already been discussed during the Data Lab track - the "Introduction to Data Analytics" course addressed the issues of preparing data for its analysis in the Data Science process. Building a machine learning model is one of the steps of the process discussed then. So let's go through the most important elements that make up effective data preparation for the model.

Duplicates
Duplicates in data are duplicate rows (observations) that are repeated in the entire set or only in a certain part (subset) of it. For example, we can analyze data on events generated by users on a website. In the case of 01.05.2023 data, all observations are unique, but on 02.05.2023 duplicates appeared in the data for users who visited the website via a certain search engine.

Preparing data for the model - duplicates

Fig. Example of occurrence of duplicates in loan data.

Removing duplicates is an important step because their presence in the data creates noise. This, in turn, can lead to a reduction in model accuracy. In addition, working with duplicate data results in additional processing time and consumes resources, such as memory and computational power. Removing them reduces processing time. Issues related to model accuracy, data interpretation and processing optimization make the removal of duplicates a necessary step.

Missing values
Another phenomenon often observed in the data is the occurrence of missing values. The occurrence of observations with missing values can be the result of various types of problems: for example, an error in the software that collects the data or an error on the side of the application that sends incomplete data. Their presence introduces additional challenges in the data preparation process and can influence models to generate incorrect results. To negate the impact of missing data, two techniques are mainly used.

Removing rows/columns with missing values
Removing observations with missing data is the simplest technique. This method is effective when the number of observations with missing values is small compared to the number of observations in the entire dataset. If there is a large percentage of missing data, removing observations from the dataset may result in the losing a lot of important information and reducing the size of the dataset. This may cause that we will not have an adequate volume of data to train a model that gives good results.

Preparing data for the model - removing empty values

Fig. Fill in missing values with the most common values.

Filling in the missing values based on the complete observations (imputation)
The second way to deal with missing values is to fill in the missing data with the mean (or median) value based on all the other observations in a column. In the case of categorical variables, we will not benefit from supplementing missing values with the mean or median (since we can only count statistical values for numerical values).

However, we can, for example, fill in missing values with the value that occurs most often in a column or with a constant (e.g., category unknown).

This method is most useful when the percentage of data is small and the distribution of the variable in question is close to a normal distribution. In such a case, this operation will not strongly disturb the natural variability in the data, which could result in a model fitted on the training data, but inaccurate on the test set.

Preparing data for the model - imputation

Fig. Fill in missing values with the most common values.

Outliers
Outliers are data that can lead to errors in the machine learning model and thus negatively affect the quality of the results returned by the model. Outliers are values that deviate significantly from the rest of the data and may be the result of measurement errors or real-world anomalies. Some algorithms (such as linear regression) are sensitive to their occurrence.

For example, if we want to predict real estate prices, the dataset we use to teach the predictive model may contain outliers (e.g., it contains properties that are very expensive). The model may tend to predict prices that in reality may be too high.

For this reason, we should check the presence of outliers, and then we can:

remove them from the dataset
standardize the data to minimize their impact (we will talk about standardization a little later)
use algorithms that are less sensitive to their occurrence (such as decision trees)
To identify outliers, we can use scatter plots, as well as statistical charts - such as a box plot.

From a statistical point of view, outliers are those that NOT fall between Q1 - 1.5 * IQR and Q3 + 1.5 * IQR.

The IQR (interquartile range) is the quartile range, or the difference between the third and first quartiles.

Converting categorical (textual) data to numeric data– categorical encoding
Categorical variables are a type of discrete variables that take values from a limited set of categories or labels. Examples of categorical variables include:

gender (e.g., male or female)
color (e.g. red, orange, green)
size (e.g. small, medium, large)
Machine learning models are based on mathematical equations and functions that describe the relationships between input variables and output variables. For this reason, they do not understand textual data (including categorical variables). For this reason, we use transformations that result in the conversion of categorical variables have numerical variables. We will present the three most popular techniques used in the context of categorical data encoding:

Binary encoding
Dummy encoding involves assigning each categorical variable a unique binary value (0 or 1). For example, the variable we cited, which stores gender, could be encoded so that a male would be assigned the value "0" and a female would be assigned the value "1" (or vice versa).

Ordinal encoding
Ordinal encoding involves assigning a unique numeric code for each category based on their alphabetical order or other criterion. For example, a categorical variable storing size could be encoded so that the "small" category would be assigned the value "1", the "medium" category would be assigned the value "2", and the "large" category would be assigned the value "3". The digits 1, 2, 3 reflect the relationship between sizes - we know (and more importantly: the model knows) that small < medium < large.

Label encoding
Label encoding also involves assigning a unique numeric code to each category, but here it is done arbitrarily. We should use this type of encoding for variables for which the order is not important. In our case, such a variable will be a variable storing information about the color. It is not important what color gets the label of 1: red or either of the other two (orange or green).

You must remember that the choice of encoding technique is closely related to the characteristics of the variable. For this reason, you need to think carefully about which one will be suitable for the chosen variable.

Data standardization
Standardization of variables is the process of transforming numerical data so that they have a mean value equal to 0 and a standard deviation equal to 1. To achieve this, let's take each value in the set, such as the area of a house, from which we subtract the average area of the house and divide by the standard deviation of that variable. We can write the standardization with such a formula:

z = (x - mean) / std.

Where:

z is the value after standardization,
x is the value in the data set,
mean is the mean value of a given variable,
std is the standard deviation of the given variable
Why do we perform data standardization?
The first reason is the desire to improve the performance of machine learning algorithms. Many of the algorithms, such as linear regression and support vector machine, perform far better on standardized data - if only because standardization reduces the impact of outliers on model performance.

The second reason is that standardization equalizes the scales of the variables, i.e. brings all values into equal value ranges. Such an operation is necessary when we predict the outcome on the basis of variables that have different ranges of values - for example, when deciding whether to grant a loan.

Let's assume that the two variables we take into account (realistically there will be many more) are the borrower's monthly earnings and the number of years worked. We can assume that the values of earnings are in the range of 1,500 to 30,000 PLN, and the number of years worked from 2 to 30. If the result of our predictions were returned by a linear regression model, such a model would strongly favor the variable storing information on earnings over the number of years worked, which realistically is also an important factor in the decision to grant a loan. Once standardization is done, both variables will be treated without undue bias.

Standardization also removes the effect of units on the results of the model - that is, when different variables have different units of measurement (such as kilometers and meters). In this case, a variable with a larger scale (meters) will have a greater impact on the model than a variable with a smaller scale (kilometers). By standardizing the data, the variables will be scaled in such a way that the units of measurement will not affect the outcome of the model.

Examples of data standardization
Let's refer to the example we mentioned earlier. We have a variable that stores data on the borrower's earnings. We know that the distribution of these values forms a normal distribution with a mean of 10,000 PLN and a standard deviation of 2,500 PLN.

Preparing data for the model - data standardization #1

Suppose we have an observation (row) in the data for one of the customers. We know that the customer earns 15,000 PLN. To standardize this value, we substitute 15,000 PLN in place of "x" in our set:

z = 15000 - 10000 / 2500 = 2

Which means that our observation on the distribution graph will appear in this place:

Preparing data for the model - data standardization #2

Data normalization
Data normalization is the process of transforming values in numerical data so that they fall within a certain range (usually between 0 and 1). To achieve this effect, each value of a variable must be subtracted from the minimum value of the variable, and then divided by the result of the difference between the maximum and minimum values:

x_norm = (x - min(x)) / (max(x) - min(x)).

Where:

x_norm is the value after normalization,
x is the value in the data set,
min(x) is the minimum value of a given variable,
max(x) is the maximum value of a given variable.
We use data normalization when we care about:

improving the performance of machine learning algorithms - such as linear regression, but also those based on measuring distances between data points - such as k-nearest neighbors or the k-means algorithm in unsupervised learning
equalizing the range of variable values - so that each variable is assigned values in the same range (e.g., between 0 and 1 or between - 1 and 1)
abolishing the importance of units - which makes it easier to interpret the results of the model
Standardization vs. normalization
Standardization	Normalization
The main feature of the values after transformation	Mean value equal to 0, standard deviation equal to 1	Values belonging to the range <0, 1> or <-1, 1> - depending on the type of normalization
Distribution of data	Normal distribution	Used when the distribution is other than normal
Outliers	Reduces the impact of outliers	Does not always deal with outliers (scales most data to a small interval)
When to use?	When a machine learning algorithm requires that the data have a normal distribution (e.g., logistic regression, linear regression)	When an algorithm does not require a normal distribution of the data (e.g., k-nearest neighbors, neural networks)
The above rules let us build some intuition about when to use normalization and when to use standardization. Nevertheless, it is difficult to set a single rule for when to do one or the other. You can always train the model on the raw, normalized data and then on the data after standardization/normalization, and compare the model results to decide which method is more appropriate for the problem you are analyzing.

Splitting the data into a training set and a test set
Splitting a dataset into subsets is one of the most important practices used in machine learning. It involves dividing the data into two or three independent subsets:

training set and test set
or

training set, validation set and test set
Training set
Training set - a subset of data that is used to train a model. The training set should be the largest part of the original set.

Validation set
Validation set - a subset that is used to optimize the model using hyperparameters and select the best model. The size of this set is much smaller than the training set.

Test set
Test set - a subset that is used to evaluate the quality of the model. It represents the smallest subset of all.

We know that the training, validation and test sets are the result of splitting the main set. In this case, in what proportions do we divide our primary set?

Matching the proportions between the size of each subset is quite an important element in machine learning. In general, the proportions between sets depend on the amount of available data and the complexity of the problem we are solving.

Some models (such as neural networks or support vector machine) require a sizable amount of data to train, which is worth keeping in mind when determining the size of the training set.

Models that have a small number of hyperparameters are usually easier to validate and possibly tune, and therefore do not require large validation sets.

The opposite is true when the model has many hyperparameters - then the size of the validation set must be larger. It may happen that you train a model that has no hyperparameters (or you do not want to optimize them), in which case there is no need to separate the validation set. In such a case, we divide our collection into two: training and testing.

A starting point can be the division:

60% / 20% / 20% (in the case of splitting into training, validation and test sets)
70 / 30% (in the case of splitting into sets: training and test)
Below is the result of splitting a set consisting of 614 observations into a training and test set in the proportion of 70% / 30%:

Preparing data for the model - set splitting

Another way, slightly more automated, is to use cross-validation, which we will talk about in the slide in the context of hyperparameter optimization.

Summary
In the article above, we talked about a number of important aspects that are relevant to preparing data for a machine learning model. We talked about removing missing values and redundant variables. We touched on encoding categorical values, as well as data standardization and normalization. In addition, we defined what the division of data into training, validation and test sets consists of. We know that correct data preparation can significantly improve model accuracy, so it is worth spending time on this process.