Business applications of machine learning algorithms
Introduction
Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence that involves the use of algorithms that learn and adapt based on data. In recent years, machine learning has gained immense popularity in various business sectors. It is used to increase efficiency, optimize processes and implement new solutions. In this article, we will tell you what are the areas where machine learning is being successfully used for business development.

Customer care
One form of business automation is the use of chatbots. A chatbot is an application whose purpose is to conduct conversations with people using text or voice. The first chatbots operated on the basis of rules that told the bots what action to take. Nowadays, machine learning algorithms, natural language processing (NLP) and huge volumes of text from, for example, the Internet or books are used to build advanced solutions. This allows for increasingly natural and fluid conversations with customers. In business, the use of chatbots can increase customer care efficiency, provide round-the-clock support and reduce costs. The use of bots is already quite common, in both small and large company sectors. Below are examples of companies that use them in their products:

Facebook - Facebook allows the creation of chatbots for businesses in Messenger, which can automatically answer customers' questions, redirect them to the right place on the site or help them with purchases. Such a solution is used by, among others. by: Zara, H&M, Sephora, Spring or Domino's Pizza.
Slack - a tool for internal communication in companies that offers integrations with chatbots (such as Astro, which makes it easy to manage emails and meeting calendars)
Duolingo - an application that uses chatbots to polish users' language skills through interactive conversations
Machine learning - chatbot

Recommendations
Machine learning is also used in building recommendation engines. Algorithms process customer behavior data based on a variety of data such as a customer's historical purchases, inventory, demographic trends to select products or services that can be recommended to the customer. Examples of the use of machine learning-based recommendation engines include:

E-commerce - for example, large foreign companies such as Amazon and Walmart, but also domestic companies such as Allegro use recommendation engines to personalize and speed up user purchases
Entertainment - examples of companies that use content recommendation are Netflix, YouTube or Spotify. Based on a user's historical behavior, as well as the behavior of users similar to them (e.g. collaborative filtering), they recommend movies, TV series and music that a user might potentially be interested in.
Social media giants such as Instagram, Twitter, TikTok and Facebook also use historical user actions to recommend content to users. For example, if you watch videos about technology news on TikTok, the algorithm will suggest further technology-related content.
HR services - recommendations are also applicable to recruitment services. Candidates can receive offer recommendations based on what offers they have viewed or offers that users similar to them have viewed. Examples of companies that use recommendation engines in the recruitment business include Pracuj.pl and LinkedIn.
Many recommendation systems use the Collaborative Filtering technique. In this article you will find the basics of how this mechanism works.

Machine learning - recommendations

Fig. _The tiles on Netflix's main screen are the result of the recommendation algorithm. Do you remember the last time you happened to use a search feature on Netflix?

Image classification and recognition
Many companies are using machine learning, or rather its branch related to deep learning and neural networks, to process images. Image recognition is used in many applications, such as Facebook, to tag people in photos.

Image recognition also has applications in commerce, where it can be used to:

identifying suspicious activity such as theft,
robots scanning shelves to identify stock shortages or misplaced products,
verifying the scanning of products previously in a shopping cart.
One of the next applications is the use of machine learning in the context of image recognition for security purposes - both in the real and digital world. In the real world, surveillance systems are equipped with software that can recognize people and, for example, send alerts to your smartphone if a person previously unrecognized as a household member appears near your home. You can see the capabilities of cameras using machine learning, for example here.

In the digital world, facial recognition is the main way to unlock a smartphone or applications that require special security (such as online banking or the stock market).

Customer churn optimization
Businesses benefit from predicting customer churn: when their customers could potentially stop using their services. Machine learning algorithms find patterns in historical sales and demographic data, for example, to understand why a company is losing customers. Using the data, machine learning models can warn which customers are at risk of moving their business to another location, discover why customers are leaving, and then suggest steps the company should take to retain customers.

The churn rate is a metric that expresses the percentage of customers who resigned from the service during a given period, divided by the number of customers at the beginning of that period. It is a metric that is particularly relevant for companies in the service and subscription industries. Models that optimize the churn rate are used by companies such as:

Spotify,
Amazon,
Netflix,
HBO,
Adobe.
Many telecom companies also use machine learning-based churn rate modeling to prevent customer churn, such as offering better deals on contract renewals.

Dynamic pricing
Companies often analyze historical data with the prices of their products and other purchasing variables to understand how prices evolve under different conditions - depending on time of day, season, weather conditions, proximity to holidays. Machine learning algorithms can learn from such data to enable companies to set prices dynamically. Two examples where this effect is most apparent are:

airlines - very often we can see that airline ticket prices rise when the vacations are in progress
transportation services (e.g., Uber) - surely more than once you've ordered an Uber to an address of your choice, exited the app without confirming your order, came back to it after a while and saw a different price. That's because Uber uses dynamic fare pricing, which depends on, among other things, the number of drivers in the area and the number of people looking for rides at any given time.
Machine learning - dynamic pricing

Fig. Example of Uber's use of dynamic pricing. The prices shown on the phone screen change depending on the number of available drivers in the immediate area of the pickup location, the time of day and many other factors..

Fraud detection
As we mentioned earlier, machine learning is about finding patterns. Because of this, it is possible to find anomalies beyond these patterns, making it possible for models of unsupervised learning, for example, to detect events that could be potential fraud attempts.

Companies try to understand the typical behavior of individual customers, such as when, where and for what amounts a customer makes transactions using a payment card. By analyzing all transactions, the machine learning model is able to determine which transactions are within the user's typical range and which are outside the established norm. This can indicate that there is fraud involved.

Fraud detection also has applications in industries such as gambling, retail, cybersecurity, and tourism, where hackers are particularly targeting airline or car rental software.

Extracting information from text
Machine learning, combined with NLP techniques, makes it possible to identify those elements in documents that are relevant to a particular company. Organizations are choosing to process documents such as invoices and contracts to extract relevant information. This approach allows for increased efficiency and accuracy, as well as saving resources. In addition, information extraction can be used, for example, to create concise summaries e.g. from lengthy articles about world events. Information extraction is also used in medical systems to better manage patient information, as well as KYC (Know Your Customer) systems, where verification-relevant customer information is extracted.

Machine learning - extraction of information

Fig. Extracting information from text.

Summary
In the article, we touched on some of the main areas where the use of machine learning models helps speed up processes in many companies. We learned about the use of machine learning in customer service, e-commerce or banking. Machine learning has so many applications that it can be used to solve almost any problem. Of course, that's assuming you have the right resources in the form of data, funding, time, and skilled data scientists.