Problems related to machine learning model implementation
Introduction
We know that machine learning is a vast field, from which we can distinguish four types based on the way the machine learns (supervised learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning and reinforcement learning). The wide choice of algorithms means that we can solve a wide range of problems in finance, medicine, e-commerce and many others using machine learning models. Huge opportunities, also means serious problems faced by organizations. We will talk about the phenomena that can be a problem in the context of building and maintaining machine learning models. We will explain why we actually consider them problematic.

Collecting data
Data collection is one of the first things we do when we decide that we want to use machine learning in our operations. It may be that we didn't collect data before making the decision, or we have too little data. Poor data availability means that it can be time-consuming and expensive to create appropriate data sets. It is very rarely possible to use external data, so we must have a representative dataset. It's also important to remember that large datasets mean significant storage and infrastructure management costs. For this reason, it is better to avoid collecting data that we know has little chance of being used.

Quality of data
Data quality is a key issue when building machine learning models because of its direct impact on the quality of the results the model achieves. What are the important aspects in terms of data quality?

Incomplete data
Missing data can introduce errors into a model and reduce its effectiveness. For example, if the model relies on the age of the customer in its predictions, missing this information can result in incorrect predictions.

Errors in data
The data used to build the model may contain errors or irregularities that will introduce errors into the model as well. For example, if the database contains incorrect medical data, a model using this data to diagnose diseases will produce bad results, making it impossible to base a disease treatment plan on the information returned by the model.

Lack of data consistency
It is often the case that the data that eventually goes into a machine learning model comes from many different sources. This means that they may have different structures, which introduces inconsistency. An example would be a company selling electronic equipment through various sales channels (e.g., its own website, ebay), where the data may have a different structure. This can lead to problems in sales modeling.

Data scaling
Our data can have different scales, which can lead to problems in comparing observations with each other, as well as modeling. Variables in the data can have different units and ranges of values. Without the use of scaling, the result of a machine learning model may be based, for example, on features that have larger values, which is the wrong behavior. Scaling makes all features treated equally. Suppose we want to assess the creditworthiness of a bank customer and we have two variables:

Customer's annual income (range of values from 20000 to 500000 PLN)
The customer's age (range of values from 18 to 75)
Using the data without scaling, larger values of annual income will have a much greater impact on the model than the customer's age. The significance of the amount of income relative to the customer's age, however, is not due to the nature of the characteristic itself, but mainly to its value. The problem can be solved using normalization (e.g., min-max), where features will have comparable ranges of values. We can determine that we perform scaling, where for a range of <0, 1>, we assume that 0 means income of 20000 PLN, and 1 means maximum income - 500000 PLN. We do the same with age, where 0 is the minimum age (18 years) and 1 is the maximum age (75 years).

Inadequate range of data
The data used to build the model may be insufficient or inappropriate for a particular application. For example, if the model uses sales data from the previous year, it will not account for changes in the economy that occurred in the current year. In this case, relying on data from the wrong chart (relative to the present), may introduce errors in the machine learning model's results.

Bias-variance tradeoff
One of the key concepts in machine learning is the tradeoff between bias and variance. Let's start explaining this issue with a simple example.

Suppose you want to learn to play an instrument, such as drums. You have two choices:

You choose easy songs, which are fairly simple to learn, but don't sound as good as more difficult ones. In this case, you are not challenged enough, which means you are biased. You're not progressing fast enough and progress is not very fast.
You choose more difficult songs that sound better, but require more work to play them well. In this case, the challanege is too big and you make a lot of different mistakes, which means that your performance is marked by a lot of variance.
The optimal way to learn would be to find songs that are difficult enough to challenge you, but not so difficult that learning to play them is not too complicated.

By analogy, we can view the bias-variance tradeoff phenomenon in machine learning. Bias refers to the error resulting from model simplification, a situation in which the model is unable to respond to the complexity of the data. The model is too simple to fit to the data.

Variance refers to the error resulting from over-fitting the model to the training data, i.e., overly an complex model. Such a model is not able to generalize well, resulting in high variability in the results (e.g., predicting the price of a house on test data, we may underestimate its value by 10% in one case, and overestimate it by 15% in another one). A low-value model would still be wrong, but the average size of the error will not be as large.

Machine learning - bias variance #1

Looking at the graphic above, let's assume that the center of the smallest circle represents the situation where our error is 0. The further away from the center of the circle, the larger the error.

As for the dispersion of points relative to the center of the circle: the closer the points are to each other, the smaller the variation. On the other hand, if the dispersion of points is larger, the greater the variance.

An optimal model should have a balanced relationship between the bias (the size of the error) and the variance (the variability of the error).

Imagine that we have a dataset in which we have information about the area of a house and its price (which we will want to calculate based on the area). Therefore, the independent variable is the area of the house, and the dependent variable is the price of the house. We divided the data into a training set and a test set using double random split. Each time, different observations went into the training set. The training data is shown in red, and the test data in green.

Machine learning - bias variance #2

Looking at both variants of splitting the data into training and test data, we can see that the model perfectly matched the training data, so we can assume that its error on this data is 0. The situation is slightly different for the test data. We see that the average distance of the points belonging to the test data (the black line drawn from the point to the curve describing the model) is different in the two cases. For the first variant of data partitioning, the error was 8,000 USD, and for the second variant, the error was 3,000 USD, which means that we have a high variance due to over-fitting the model to the training data. The model is not able to generalize well the decisions based on the test data.

Machine learning - bias variance #3

Now let's see what the next case looks like. Again, our data has been randomly divided twice into training and test subsets. On the left, we see a model curve whose shape does not coincide with most of the red (training) points in the data - this means that the model is too simple and under-trained. An error of 4,000 USD was recorded on the training set, and 4,500 USD on the test set. In the second case, the training set and the test set look slightly different, but the errors are comparable - for the training set - 3,500 USD, and for the test set - 3,700 USD. This means that we have a high bias (error), but a low variance, because between the two cases there are no large relative differences between the calculated errors. Nevertheless, the calculated errors are high on both the training and test sets, indicating that our model is too simple to give accurate results.

Machine learning - bias variance #4

In the image above, we have the same dataset also split twice into a training set and a test set. Looking at the curve representing the model, we can see that the model fitted the training data quite well, with small prediction errors (small distance of individual points relative to the straight line). The situation is similar for the test data. The model error for the training data was 800 USD, and for the test data 1,000 USD. In the second case, the model has a similar shape and an equally good fit to the training data, and the predictions on the test data do not have a large error. The error on the training data was 900 USD, and on the test data it was 1,100 USD.

Based on this we can see that our model has a low bias and low variance. This is the state we will want to strive for when building machine learning models.

Reducible and irreducible errors
The results based on model operation are subject to error. Using test data as a check on the trained model, we can assess how much the prediction differs from the actual values.

For example - we know that the price of a house is actually 550,000 PLN, and the model, based on the variables, has valued the property at 585,000 PLN. The difference between the two values represents the model's error - it erred in its prediction by 35,000 PLN.

Prediction error can come from two sources, which is why we distinguish two types of error:

reducible error - results directly from a mismatch between the function that predicts the outcome based on the explanatory variables and the function that determines the true relationship between the independent and dependent variables (that is, between X and Y). The model does not know the true relationship between the two, so the resulting function is only an estimate. A reducible error can be reduced by using improved methods (i.e., in linear regression, for example, we can use regularization). A reducible error is related to the bias and variance.
Irreducible error - results from the fact that the independent variables (i.e. X) do not determine 100% of the value of the dependent variable (i.e. Y). This means that there are other variables, independent of those we know have some influence on the result. The only way to correct the irreducible error is to identify external influences and include them in the set of variables that the machine learning model uses to generate results.
Choosing the right model
One of the challenges we face when building a machine learning-based solution is choosing the right algorithm. Sometimes for several reasons, the choice can be problematic.

Number of models - there are many different machine learning models, and each of them has advantages and disadvantages. Choosing the right model can be difficult due to their large number.
Complexity of models - some machine learning models, such as neural networks, are very complex and require a lot of computational resources until they are trained and then begin to produce results. The choice of model can be dictated by the resources at our disposal.
Problem type - characteristics of particular machine learning models may make them better suited to solve a given problem than others. For example, neural networks are often used where the problem is based on image analysis. Decision tree-based models, on the other hand, may be better for classification problems where we do not have as much training data or the data is not overly complex.
Dataset size - different models may have different performance depending on the size of the dataset. Some models perform better on small datasets (e.g. decision trees, k-nearest neighbors). There are models that perform better on large datasets - such models are neural networks or models based on ensemble methods (bagging, boosting).
Interpretability - some models are easier to interpret, i.e. it is easier to explain to potential stakeholders how the model arrived at the result. Choosing the right model may depend on whether there is a strong need to understand how the model arrives at its results. For example, in use cases that rely on sensitive data or those where the model affects important things. E.g., a model tasked with assessing the creditworthiness of customers may have such a business requirement because customers who are not granted credit may want to know the reasons for that decision.
Efficiency of model training
We know that an integral part of building a model is training it. When creating production solutions, we may encounter difficulties in optimizing the time and cost of training a machine learning model. The more complex the model, and the more training data we provide to the model, the longer the learning process will be. It may also turn out that the volume of data is so large that we will be affected by problems related to the limited memory of the machine we are training on. Increasing hardware resources usually solves the problem, but it also increases the cost. The learning process is affected by the choice of hyperparameters. In neural networks, such hyperparameters are, for example: learning rate, batch size, or number of epochs, Their appropriate selection can speed up the learning process. Parallel and distributed computing are also used to optimize model training performance.

Parallel computing relies on simultaneous execution of multiple operations to speed up calculations. Today's processors consist of multiple cores, making parallel computing techniques possible:

multithreading - simultaneous execution of multiple threads (independent sequences of instructions) on a single core.
multicore - simultaneous execution of multiple tasks by dividing them into smaller parts and delegating these tasks to different cores.
Nowadays, GPUs (Graphics Processing Unit) are also used, i.e. special graphics processors optimized for parallel calculations related to graphics and matrix computing. GPUs feature a large number of computing cores and also perform well in machine learning.

Finally, moving to a higher level, we can talk about distributed computing. It involves dividing tasks into smaller parts and executing them on multiple independent machines or computer clusters. A cluster is a group of computers that are linked together to perform computing tasks. The cooperating machines communicate with each other, exchanging data and synchronizing computing results. Distributed computing makes it possible to process huge data sets that far exceed the capabilities of a single machine. An example of a computing engine that uses distributed computing is Spark, developed by Apache.

Model security
Machine learning models can be vulnerable to attacks. The main reason is that they are data-driven, and attacks can be based on manipulating the data supplied to the model. Some models have a high degree of complexity (e.g. neural networks) and potential attacks can be difficult to detect and defend against. We can distinguish several types of attacks:

Privacy attacks - involve using a machine learning model to recreate or disclose private information, such as passwords, payment card numbers or medical data.
Adversarial attacks - involve making small changes to the input data that are invisible to humans, but enough to fool the model. This will cause the model to make the wrong decision. E.g., an attack can be launched against an application tasked with recognizing images, where small changes in the image can lead to the object in the image being misidentified.
Attacks using training data - allow to confuse the model by introducing errors or false information. An example would be a model that classifies emails as SPAM. By manipulating the data, it is possible to cause the model to flag messages that are spam as regular messages.
Ethical and social implications
An important issue with machine learning is whether the model is consistent with the ethics and characteristics of society. It is important to remember that models can create problems such as:

Discrimination - the model in its predictions may manifest discriminatory behavior against certain social groups (e.g., based on gender, ancestry, race or sexual orientation). An example of a system in which we may have to deal with such a phenomenon is a recruitment system that favors men or people with light skin tone.
Safety - The models that make up autonomous driving systems can jeopardize human safety when they have not been properly trained and tested. Improper vehicle behavior can result in traffic accidents.
Responsibility - machine learning algorithms used, for example, in credit risk assessment make decisions to grant or deny credit based on various variables.
Increase in unemployment - today's organizations are introducing a lot of automation in their processes. Some tasks can be performed by computers and robots, which may involve the loss of jobs for employees.
Privacy - machine learning models can collect personal data, so make sure the data is stored with the consent/knowledge of the data user. An example would be using patients' medical data to train a model to detect diseases based on blood test results.
When designing a machine learning model that affects the lives of people and society, it is important to keep in mind the need to consider ethical and social aspects.

Scaling and integration
The problem of scaling and integrating machine learning models relates to the difficulties of implementing and managing large-scale models, as well as linking them to existing systems. The life cycle of a machine learning model, in addition to data collection and preparation, training and evaluation, also consists of model deployment and then monitoring its performance in a production environment.

As a result of monitoring, we may conclude that there is a need to scale the algorithm or the environment on which the model runs. As the volume of data grows, models become more complex, and training them requires more and more computing power. For this reason, finding the right hardware solutions and optimizing the performance of machine learning algorithms is very important for efficient use of resources, and thus for effective scaling.

A machine learning model is usually part of a much larger system, and for this reason it must be properly integrated with existing system components at the implementation stage. Correct integration requires the development of appropriate communication and information transfer strategies between the model and other system components (e.g., using databases or APIs), which can be time-consuming and problematic with very complex systems.

Model maintenance and evolution
Maintaining and evolving a machine learning model can be somewhat cumbersome due to changing business requirements over time. Changing assumptions may require modifying the model and re-training it.

An example might be the need to add new variables that have started to be collected in the organization and a requirement has arisen to use them in a particular model. In models that work in production, it is often the case that the data on which the model is based changes, which can lead to a deterioration in the quality of the model's results.

In order for a model to be continuously effective, it is a good idea to regularly adapt it to new data. Machine learning models must also comply with regulatory requirements such as GDPR, which can also be an additional challenge in maintaining the model.

Summary
In the article, we touched on issues that can be problematic when developing machine learning-based solutions. Data quality, choosing the right model, as well as the balance between bias and variability or social and ethical implications are important issues we need to keep in mind. Once we have implemented the model, it is important to properly scale and evolve the model with changing conditions.